Today is the birthday of the LHC, the world's largest and most powerful particle collider and the largest machine in the world. 
The first beam was circulated through the collider on the morning of 10 September 2008. 
It was built by the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) between 1998 and 2008 in collaboration with over 10,000 scientists 
and hundreds of universities and laboratories, as well as more than 100 countries. 
It lies in a tunnel 27 kilometres (17 mi) in circumference and as deep as 175 metres (574 ft) beneath the France–Switzerland border near Geneva.
First collisions achieved an energy of 3.5 teraelectronvolts (TeV) per beam, about four times the previous world record. 
After upgrades it reached 6.5 TeV per beam (13 TeV total collision energy, the present world record). 
At the end of 2018, it entered a two-year shutdown period for further upgrades.
The collider has four crossing points, around which are positioned seven detectors, each designed for certain kinds of research. 
The LHC primarily collides proton beams, but it can also use beams of heavy ions: Lead–lead collisions and proton-lead collisions 
are typically done for one month per year. The aim of the LHC's detectors is to allow physicists to test the predictions of different theories of particle physics, 
including measuring the properties of the Higgs boson and searching for the large family of new particles predicted by supersymmetric theories, as well as other unsolved 
questions of physics. 

E' oggi il compleanno del LHC, il piu grande collisore di particelle del mondo nonche' la piu' grande macchina al mondo.
Entrata in funzione nel 2008, e' stato testato con un fascio di protoni con un energia di 3.5 teraelectronvolts (TeV), un'energia 4 volte superiore al record precedente. 
Dopo qualche miglioramento, ha raggiunto l'energia di 6.5 teraelectronvolts (TeV) per fascio (13 TeV complessivi) ed e' l'attuale record del mondo.
Costruito in Svizzera, vicino a Ginevra sul bordo franco-svizzero, e' il figlio di un progetto europeo e dell' Organizzazone Europea per l'energia nucleare (conosciuto anche come CERN)
in collaborazione con oltre 10000 scienziati e dallo sforzo congiunto di centinaia di universita' e centinaia di nazioni.
Alla fine del 2018 il rilevatore e' entrato in periodo di pausa di 2 anni per permettere un miglioramento di tutta l'infrastruttura.

#AnniversaryOfTheDay
#Phi6 #physics #math  #science 
@erikpillon

Source: Wikipedia